few of those are first of all he's super
pragmatic know for someone who's so you
know the world's most famous Anarchist
or whatever the time extremely pragmatic
and I'll give two two ways that the
first is his Anarchist who was
supporting the labor party which is a
very bad party in you know historical uh
terms to in in an electoral sphere in
order to enter the state because that
would open up more possibil
we get beaten up by the cops we can call
you right so even at the minimum that it
was useful but he's also was extremely
practical like he was David was not a
remote thinker like he was trying to
apply it all the time in any activist
group he's in whatever he's in he's
trying to solve problems and do things
and to do that and also to be you know
if you're in favor obviously is dialogue
and consensus process and real democracy
you necessarily have to be uh
necessarily have to be pragmatic um he's
also not dogmatic um he was put it this
way it's the way I put but you know he's
like verbs not nouns you know in in um
that essay that ni referenced uh at the
beginning I think it says you know um
there are no isms in uh in anarchism
there not you know you don't have the
same kind of Corpus of great you know
generally speaking male um uh
theoreticians because it's more of a
practice it's more of a it's more of a
doing he's radical like in the real
sense of it trying to go to the root of
what a particular system is to
understand it extremely generous with
time and people and what people's actual
capacities are to do
things um creative this is the
possibilities point so basic Point like
the world is made and remade every
single day and therefore it's that you
know the fact it's possible to to do it
differently but than keeping it the same
way is an act right it takes a lot of
effort keep
taking basically naive perhaps fa naive
but a naive outside look at a system of
power to unpick or understand or to
reveal its uh its system of power or its
its Logics of power which is often more
what's unsaid than what's said or what's
done than what's uh what's written uh
and of course active know the the point
is to change it
so I don't want to say worse because
that's too um unidirectional or
undialectical or whatever but it's
definitely Bleaker right it's definitely
Starker um the the reality I mean look
at whichever issue you want to look at
but I'll probably know Zone in on
three like climate breakdown Jan last
month was 1.75 degrees above
pre-industrial averages
El Nino weather systems finished like no
one you know it's not just it's really
really a lot hotter and the scientists
like yeah it's really bad but you know
we thought it was going to be really bad
like oh my God it's really bad we had no
idea it was going to be this
this bad like it's it's a lot you know
it's a lot starer than it was even four
and a half years ago um Imperial
violence is
just raw and unfiltered OB the genocide
and Gaza the the the uh ethnic cleansing
of uh of Gaza now is just you know
really really
Stark and the rise of the far right
everywhere you know everywhere they're
just doing better and better um better
and better everywhere so the
contradictions in the system are um
they're like really in our face like
it's it's it's so it's so clarified but
I remember something that David used to
say I don't know 10 15 years ago kind of
around occupy after
occupy which was like in a message
to let's say the left us the people in
in this room it's like ah okay yeah but
you're not that smart right like your
neighbors think exactly the same thing
as you like okay they might not put in
exactly the same sophisticated terms or
whatever like the system
is broke everyone can see that it's not
the point you know the issue is not um
that we are wrong in some way or that
people don't you know constructing we
and people as different things is
obviously a problem but anyway we it's
not that we are wrong or the people have
don't know it's that we um you know we
collectively don't have any power so or
we our power is constrained within um
within any given within this given
system so for this kind of attempt to
gain to bring some of David into these
questions um I don't know to like survey
this hellscape that we're that we're in
and what's it it says on the gate in in
uh The Inferno on the Gates of Hell
abandon all hope ye who enter here right
um so in that uh in that I'll there'll
be I think I've got six bits right four
bits of
descent uh but as our remembers in
elsewhere in Inferno in Dante's own what
he says rather than what it says there
it says the path to Heaven begins in
hell so we can have two points of ascent
at the end because you can't get to you
can't get to heaven without hell um and
that's part of what the moment that
we're we're in so the first one
uh the death spiral of neoliberalism you
the the global system that is meant to
uh have a set of rules of course written
not in our interests and so on and so
forth It's meant to have a set of rules
which is meant to be able to govern the
system at least to for the interest of
of course the ruling class and then some
minority that it's also meant to to
serve but it doesn't do that right it
doesn't it doesn't do that at all like
if you were trying to look at it from a
kind of trying to apply a logical thing
to it this system would have done a few
things differently purely for its own
benefit purely to sustain the the
existing rule of uh of the ruling class
in
covid they would have released the uh
the formula to create the vaccines
rather than restricting them so that
only a few companies could make them
right they could have produced vaccines
that could have vaccinated the entire
world in one year according to one uh
one study
and when the rules on intellectual
property were written for in in the
World Trade Organization it was with the
idea that this waiver would be released
I.E the vaccine formula would be
released if you had a global pandemic
which was killing millions of people and
running you know making rich people less
rich in some cases not really because
the central banks created 9 trillion
worth of dollars and massively inflated
all of their asset values but anyway in
theory you know reducing um businesses
and and so on um obviously climate
breakdown I mean you can chart the first
cop meeting in 1992 I think it was um
and the trajectory of CO2 emissions and
if you're an alien coming from space
looking at it which is like let's take
the naive approach let's take the David
eye on it look at and go yeah no nothing
happen like they weren't trying to do
anything there's no the angle doesn't
even slightly you know they're not it it
isn't um it isn't doing anything and
then from the perspective of the system
allowing this absolutely like grotesque
insane genocide which is turning which
has turned the vast majority of people
in the Imperial core against Imperial
aims is not sensible from the
perspective of the system so
like what's what's going on like the
ordinary uh kind of most left
approachers would try to focus on
individual interest or greed or is it
really in in some way in their material
interest um David was a big fan of
stupidity no not as in people being
stupid right but as in it's a useful way
to understand the world he's got um uh I
think he would view this as there's a
kind of there's a systemic stupidity
that um that the that the elite have I
mean he's got some nice stuff about you
know when you bop someone on the head
that's a lot that's it's a response of a
stupid person because it's what you do
when you can't uh say anything to anyone
you know why is it that uh emotional
labor always follows the the curve of uh
of power and violence follows the curve
of power down the other way because if
you you don't need to know anything
about anyone if you just can hit them on
the hit them on the head and they've
kind of got to that point so they've
developed to sort of systemic stupidity
so that's our first step down into um
through the Gates of Hell we've gone and
now we're we're into I haven't done I've
I've not done the maths right there's
seven circles aren't
there okay we're like one and a half
circles in we're one we're one step
in then um then Imperial violence you
know obviously it's like totally
unmasked um totally unmasked of course
in uh in Gaza of course with Trump's
ethnic cleansing plan but also just like
now Panama Canal that's ours mate no um
oh the Arctic oh yeah we're we're going
to we're going to open that all up
because it will all melt and so we need
to get Greenland because um there's
there's loads of you know Iron and zinc
and oil and more stuff under there so we
need to to to get it um and this shift
from uh you know polite liberal Empire
let's say uh tempting hegemonic Empire
to just pure dominance Empire um I think
you know David would find very
interesting have lot to say but
particularly the thing I I'm sure you'd
have a really good joke and I've been
trying to think um today about a good
joke about it but I've failed but maybe
someone else can and please bring it to
about a sort of Garian joke Garian a
David joke um about
usaid and um trumpy sacking off us a ID
which
is from an Anti-Imperialist position
absolutely bloody wonderful because USA
ID is this um you know the aid agency of
the US which funds um us
aligned uh Nos and organizations around
the world that have contributed to
regime change operations and so on but
they like they think it's woke and
there's a there's a as in they it's in
the
trumpus um and there's just like an
amazing thing that they
their stupidity is playing a again is
playing a role but it doesn't it's not
stupid for them they're trying to Signal
we're moving from the attempted hegemony
straight to dominance it's like do what
we say or else we hit you we're not
going to try
to you know s more subtly control your
media or we're not going to fund all of
your par parliamentary candidates that
are going to be Pro EU or Pro or Pro us
um
anyway so of course all of this is very
Bleak and and clarifying but it's
clarifying in um in a way which
completely tallies I think with with
David's insid I remember reading uh Deb
for the first time and being really
struck by how he looked at the basics of
Adam Smith story about how uh you know
economy grows like world first we do
some Agriculture and then we start
getting really good at the agriculture
so we have some Surplus and then we take
this so we're able to invest that in
some manufacturing and then we do the
manufacturing and then we've got so much
stuff that we don't know what to do so
then we go and do trade and obviously
Dave's like no if you're saying it's
that it's probably the other way around
like starts with trade which is Conquest
Colonial violence Etc that's then use
for manufacturing and it's only at the
end you actually do have the you know
the big set changes in uh agricultural
production um and I think
which has been going on now for over 500
years we live in like the colonial mode
of accumulation David was really good at
taking I think or mixing the you know
economic ideas with what are the ideas
actually underpin it what are the actual
structures that underpin it that are
that are hidden or uded with a a
supposed only focus on uh on the
economic
um and uh and there's anyway next I'm
I'm probably overdoing it and you have
to run for a train so I I'll I'll take
us deeper into into
hell did you see that second row of
trump pees inauguration did you did you
see them the ones that they had so the
first row is obviously it's a family
business it's a Matthew Etc you've got
you know um Jared Kushner who by the way
sorry just is the side do you know whose
childhood bed Benjamin Netanyahu sleeps
in when he goes to New York jar chrisan
j kushner's childhood bed he's he's like
old friends with his dad and he prefers
to stay in in their home and he stays in
the childhood bedroom
anyway so creepy anyway um so
behind that that you know the the the
the family there's um there's our our
new tech overlords you know there's the
the ones that sort of say it with their
with their check well not really with
their chest with their thumbs right
there's um there's Elon there's the sort
of the the dweeby one now is like no
we'll we'll we'll do fascism for you
that's cool all of them they're all
they're they're all lined up and um I
mean David would have so much to to say
about this because that
um he's got this amazing essay uh called
um uh of flying cars or on the declining
rate of profit um which I was thinking
about cuz on Saturday I went and watched
Back to the Future the musical
and then watch Back to the Future two
and three uh on TV on uh on Sunday I say
TV on you know the TVs don't exist
anymore it's all the stream but you know
what I mean um and um it's amazing
looking at what they think in 1985 they
thought that 2015 would be and it's the
same point as you know the David making
in that essay it's like we all thought
that we things were like we were G to
have loads of stuff not just this and
this with I mean this is not even I mean
this they had in in some form in in the
1950s
um so yeah where um where was it anyway
so why is it that again with all of the
you know all the money put into
technological progress it's basically
stopped and instead it's converted into
new means for surveillance and for
control and we're seeing this now like
firly fused beforehand it was like
business Tech the tech Elite they're
separate from the state they're
libertarian it's the state that's trying
to regulate them Etc and now Elon Musk
has his hands over tax
records uh who you know who's employed
by the state and um and so on so and
which made me think there's a there's a
that quote from Graver which is
um bureaucracies are Nots sells forms of
stupidity back to stupidity so much ways
of organizing stupidity and you the um I
mean there's nothing more stupid than
sadly us sitting in bed um scrolling our
screens but then that there's also going
back to the stupidity who just banging
people on the head you know
AI creates the targets and automatically
fires the or or or sets the targets for
the bombing and Gaza like the death is
now an
automated uh is now an automated process
and this Fusion between high-tech and
the and the state is um is you know the
our third descent now the the the fourth
final descent before it gets too
depressing because obviously there's
going to be possibility and uh good
elements
um uh but yeah maybe one other thing
about the tech um our Tech overlords and
David David was like really early in
saying you know the US system is is
organized corruption and it's about
using wealth to create power power to
create more wealth wealth to create more
power and I mean Elon Musk is you just
see this absolutely perfectly I mean not
only is he I'm making up this stats but
I think it's probably true but you know
if it's not actually true what it says
about reality is true right Elon Musk is
the largest recipient of government
subsidies in the history of the world
may not be true but it's in the
direction of uh it's in the direction
cing public
spending so to invest it in SpaceX so
this the public spend that's being cut
at the moment is actually the differen
is going into SpaceX yeah and I mean
going back to the the flying cars and
stuff you know NASA was the one thing
that that that sort of did some exciting
stuff and it's now it's now SpaceX
contracts it's now basically um
privatized
um so the our final descent
seventh sixth and seventh together six
and a quarter to 7th uh ring of hell um
the far right going everywhere and um
yeah David will obviously see this very
much as a symptom not a cause of of the
problem and um I sort of view it as the
the inverse side like the obvious result
of of um uh another quote taking for
David from jobs which is like
why are there jobs wise the
ruling class has figured out that happy
productive population with free time on
their hands is a moral
danger obviously true now you take that
further okay so they filled up our time
with you know nonsense stuff and um you
know emails from your boss at silly o'
and um this concept of the Sunday
scaries and all of this stuff which
they've um uh in injected but then you
know you take that a logical step
further and that is the only thing that
can give um some vital energy to people
is a form of organized hatred um and
it's a form of organized hatred not only
for the sake of hatred but it's also the
only counter economic argument right
most of the like the reform far rights
stff in Britain for example is mainly an
economic argument it doesn't take the
form of an economic argument but that's
the work is doing when they say it is
the fault of migrants Muslims and
minorities they are saying and that's
why the economy doesn't work that's why
you can't get it that's why you can't
get whatever it is that you should
reasonably expect to be able to to get
in a you know moderately technologically
advanced society and of course that's a
b totally bogus argument um but it's
providing um some some explanation for
why we allowed to be a happy productive
set of people because obviously that's
what we all um have a yearning to to be
so a little bit of Rise back to
possibilities back to um back to more
positive things um that are happening in
this
moment so one is a really big
one which is we have the end of the
unipolar fantasy right this idea that
one force you know n was saying at the
beginning you know watching the US
Empire implode I mean it's also there
most violent exactly as you said you
know most violent most
dangerous um but it is also responding
to a reality in which more manufacturing
production is in uh is in China um the
moral Authority in the world has swung
dramatically to uh to the South um you
know most peoples on earth like Gustavo
Petro the president of Colombia said you
know see in Gaza the future that they
want for us and this has um you know I
think opened up profound uh
possibilities it doesn't mean that it's
all going to be good it doesn't mean
that every you know every state every
force that isn't the us is going to be
doing positive things far from it but it
opens up a huge potential Vista for
doing things in uh in a different way
with with different alliances from below
and I mean I've see this even in a small
way it's beginning to turn things so I
my normal job I work for the progressive
International which is a Global Network
of uh member organizations who are trade
unions political parties social
movements National Liberation movement
campaign GRS blah blah blah blah um
peasants unions and so on around the
world and
um uh maybe two weeks ago we convened
nine states in the ha to launch a group
to take action um against Israel against
Israel's violations of international law
to block ships from their ports to block
arms from going Israel and to um arrest
Netanyahu if he comes to their countries
and so um and I was speaking yesterday I
think to someone very high up in a a not
like totally mainstream humanitarian NGO
who was saying yeah I think we're going
to have to really readjust our ourselves
I said what do you mean so well
basically our strategy has been you know
implicitly it's like we're trying to
convince the like
marginal well-meaning liberal in DC
Brussels London to like be a bit nicer
in this particular direction it's like
that has got us no like worse than worse
than nothing and you know we were
specifically talking in the context of
rebuilding Gaza which she's like there's
no point lobbying for like British money
to rebuild a thing or or or or Brussel
like basically the people who destroyed
it to to to rebuild it going to have to
build um you know with with new
alliances from states which may have
less money but have a a a more real and
more mutual and more
solidaristic uh
engagement um and we're seeing these
sorts of things again like Trump is
sanctioning um uh South Africa for
leading against uh the destruction of
Palestine uh and standing in you know
firmly in the in the tradition of
National
Liberation um and again speaking to
people
say US market access other states will
pick up that the trade can go somewhere
else that suddenly there are these
openings where people look say oh we've
been looking only this way and this way
actually hates us so we should we should
look elsewhere so that's one that opens
up big this as a possibility and as we
sit here in the UK again going back to
the point about sitting in the colonial
mode of production I I think our our
role is to here sitting in a country
that is part of the you know whose
government and ruling class is a key
node in in in that like to be Allied to
these forces that are emerging that in
incomplete and sometimes contradictory
ways are trying to um assert some
Independence and and openness and just
and here's the final Point towards
moving in the direction of of heav
hopefully um David really liked Marcel
Mo right really really really liked him
and um and and most is great and the
thing that David always focused on which
I love is like the idea that no Society
no social arrangement of which there are
infinite varieties are ever just one
thing or just another thing in fact you
know his the the the mostan argument is
you know uh is higher Ary exchange and
communism all exist just in different um
waiting in every single social system
and so the if we wish to have a much
more egalitarian a more communistic type
social system the we we're we we should
be looking at where does that already
exist in our in our lives and where are
the gaps in which that exists and where
are the possibilities to change that one
like final thing to take a hopeful thing
so firstly things always look kind of
Bleak until they don't right like um
David says somewhere I can't remember
that like Revolution revolutions are
normally a planetary phenomena they like
have a tendency to happen in a lot of
places um in a lot of places all at once
and
um and and so one final sort of thing
that we I want to take that that we can
all take I one thing from the dawn of
everything book which is this word
schismogenesis right in dawn of
everything's endlessly got these
examples of like this group of people do
everything totally different from this
group of people because we're next to it
now going back to the point about
emotional labor and understanding things
on the you know on the power gradient
like we really understand the
Psychopaths who have been running our
world right we really understand them
because we've had to really understand
them because they run the world and they
can they can kill people so let's use
our understanding of them to do
schismogenesis to build a thing which is
the polar opposite of that which is the
complete you know at every point it's
way easier to just do the opposite of
something than to to work out thing
let's just look at what they do look at
how they act and do the precise opposite
building on the communism that is
already in the most sense that is
already present in our society
sure I've got a Grand's total of four
minutes but um I just want to say James
uh I mean that really illustrates I
think that was a beautiful way to bring
together a lot of the pressing present
day concerns with also a lot of the
ideas that were latent within David and
possibly as both of us have agreed sort
of maybe more kind of speaking more
eloquently than ever
before
I the I mean the the sort of broader
Point are we now entering a new age of
revolutions history they do sort of
there are moments when it becomes
undeniable and inescapable that systemic
collapse is happening and that um when
it does take place can be initially very
vicious and it may look worth you know
it may look you know sort uh it it's
darkest the moment before the dawn now
that sounds trit and that sounds easy
promises that's not what I think David
was trying to say it's not what I'm
trying to say I think what I took from
what you were saying James is that um
There Is No Escape ing or denying or
evading the fact that our faith our
trust our continual habitual deference
to authorities be they laws be they
rights be they rules be they
leviathans we can't hide behind them
anymore so actually the very first step
to reclaim power that we should take is
just to acknowledge that we have a
responsibility and from that point
well then I think many things will be
possible I'm going to end on possibility
I'm going end on possibility and I'm
afraid I have to dash back to nor I'm so
sorry not to be able to hear more of
your thoughts or questions I will be at
the how the lights get in Festival um in
May at the hay as part of the hay
festival and I believe James will be too
so if any of you can get along there
it'd be great to see you all right James
thank you
so thank you and thank you to all you
guys thank you so much